INTRODUCTION

The World Social Report 2020, published by the UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs (DESA), shows that income inequality has increased in most developed countries, and some middle-income countries - including China, which has the world’s fastest growing economy.

The challenges are underscored by UN chief António Guterres in the foreword, in which he states that the world is confronting “the harsh realities of a deeply unequal global landscape”, in which economic woes, inequalities and job insecurity have led to mass protests in both developed and developing countries.

 “Income disparities and a lack of opportunities”, he writes, “are creating a vicious cycle of inequality, frustration and discontent across generations.”


OXFAM Details - Source: https://www.oxfam.org/en/5-shocking-facts-about-extreme-global-inequality-and-how-even-it

1. Lining the pockets of the world’s billionaires. The very top of the economic pyramid sees trillions of dollars of wealth in the hands of a very small group of people, predominantly men, whose fortune and power grow exponentially. Billionaires have now more wealth than the 4.6 billion people who make up 60 percent of the planet’s population. Meanwhile, around 735 million people are still living in extreme poverty. Many others are just one hospital bill or failed harvest away from slipping into it.

2. Wealth undertaxed. While the richest continue to enjoy booming fortunes, they are also enjoying some of the lowest levels of tax in decades – as are the corporations that they own. Instead taxes are falling disproportionately on working people. When governments undertax the rich, there's less money for vital services like healthcare and education, increasing the amount of care work that falls on the shoulders of women and girls.

3. Underfunded public services. At the same time, public services are suffering from chronic underfunding or being outsourced to private companies that exclude the poorest people. In many countries a decent education or quality healthcare has become a luxury only the rich can afford. It has profound implications for the future of our children and the opportunities they will have to live a better and longer life.

4. Denied a longer life. In most countries having money is a passport to better health and a longer life, while being poor all too often means more sickness and an earlier grave. People from poor communities can expect to die ten or twenty years earlier than people in wealthy areas. In developing countries, a child from a poor family is twice as likely to die before the age of five than a child from a rich family.

5. Inequality is sexist. With less income and fewer assets than men, women make up the greatest proportion of the world’s poorest households, and that proportion is growing. They are more likely to be found in poorly paid and precarious employment, supporting the market economy with cheap or free labor. They are also supporting the state through billions of hours of unpaid or underpaid care work, a huge but unrecognized contribution to our societies and economic prosperity.

CASE STUDIES - https://www.lovemoney.com/gallerylist/81646/rich-city-poor-city-where-prosperity-and-poverty-are-neighbours

South Africa was named as the most unequal country in the world in 2018 by a World Bank report. Despite the end of Apartheid in 1994, since 2011 at least 2.5 million South Africans have fallen into poverty. This can be seen in images such as this one, taken over Johannesburg, where the Kya Sands slum faces the affluent, leafy suburb of Bloubosrand. Large houses with swimming pools are separated by just a single-track road from the poverty of the tin-roofed shacks.

The Kya Sands settlement isn't the safest place to live either, and is at risk from fires spreading through the wood and plastic structures, and dirty water. "If you look even closer, the main thoroughfares in Kya Sands are actually drainages for the black, filthy water emanating from the nearby creek," Miller says.

Mumbai is densely packed with 22 million inhabitants. Not only that but the city has the largest slum population of any city in the world. In fact, as much as 43.1% of Mumbai's population lives in slums, according to the most recent census, similar to the one pictured, where blue tarpaulin is the only defence against the monsoon season.

Mumbai's Dharavi slum (pictured) is the largest in Mumbai, and the second largest in Asia, with an estimated one million inhabitants. What's even more shocking? The slum, which was the setting for Slumdog Millionaire, has a high literacy rate of 69%, making it the most literate slum in the country. This is due to India's failing economy, which has the worst levels of unemployment in 45 years according to a government survey, with many highly-educated people unable to secure work.

Mexico is the third most unequal country on the planet, according to OECD data. The country is no stranger to poverty, with 43.6% of Mexicans classified as poor. This image from Mexico City shows how closely the concrete homes of the city's poor sit next to the painted homes and tiled roofs of the more affulent.

EXTRA SOURCES

https://www.un.org/en/un75/inequality-bridging-divide

https://www.jrf.org.uk/sites/default/files/jrf/migrated/files/inequality-income-social-problems-full.pdf
